# Anomalous Process For a Windows Population

Searches for rare processes running on multiple hosts in an entire fleet or network. This reduces the detection of false positives since automated maintenance processes usually only run occasionally on a single machine but are common to all or many hosts in a fleet.

**Rule type**: machine_learning

**Severity**: low

**Risk score**: 21

**Tags**:

- Domain: Endpoint
- OS: Windows
- Use Case: Threat Detection
- Rule Type: Machine Learning
- Tactic: Persistence
- Tactic: Execution
- Resources: Investigation Guide

**Triage and analysis**

**Investigating Anomalous Process For a Windows Population**

Searching for abnormal Windows processes is a good methodology to find potentially malicious activity within a network. Understanding what is commonly run within an environment and developing baselines for legitimate activity can help uncover potential malware and suspicious behaviors.

This rule uses a machine learning job to detect a Windows process that is rare and unusual for all of the monitored Windows hosts in your environment.

**Possible investigation steps**

- Investigate the process execution chain (parent process tree) for unknown processes. Examine their executable files for prevalence, whether they are located in expected locations, and if they are signed with valid digital signatures.
- If the parent process is a legitimate system utility or service, this could be related to software updates or system management. If the parent process is something user-facing like an Office application, this process could be more suspicious.
- Investigate the process metadata — such as the digital signature, directory, etc. — to obtain more context that can indicate whether the executable is associated with an expected software vendor or package.
- Investigate other alerts associated with the user/host during the past 48 hours.

**Response and Remediation**

- Initiate the incident response process based on the outcome of the triage.
- Isolate the involved hosts to prevent further post-compromise behavior.
- If the triage identified malware, search the environment for additional compromised hosts.
- Implement temporary network rules, procedures, and segmentation to contain the malware.