# Anomalous Windows Process Creation

[edit](https://github.com/elastic/security-docs/edit/8.17/docs/detections/prebuilt-rules/rule-details/anomalous-windows-process-creation.asciidoc "Edit this page on GitHub")

Identifies unusual parent-child process relationships that can indicate malware execution or persistence mechanisms. Malicious scripts often call on other applications and processes as part of their exploit payload. For example, when a malicious Office document runs scripts as part of an exploit payload, Excel or Word may start a script interpreter process, which, in turn, runs a script that downloads and executes malware. Another common scenario is Outlook running an unusual process when malware is downloaded in an email. Monitoring and identifying anomalous process relationships is a method of detecting new and emerging malware that is not yet recognized by anti-virus scanners.

**Rule type**: machine_learning

**Severity**: low

**Risk score**: 21

**Tags**:

- Domain: Endpoint
- OS: Windows
- Use Case: Threat Detection
- Rule Type: Machine Learning
- Tactic: Persistence
- Resources: Investigation Guide

**Triage and analysis**

**Investigating Anomalous Windows Process Creation**

Searching for abnormal Windows processes is a good methodology to find potentially malicious activity within a network. Understanding what is commonly run within an environment and developing baselines for legitimate activity can help uncover potential malware and suspicious behaviors.

This rule uses a machine learning job to detect an anomalous Windows process with an unusual parent-child relationship, which could indicate malware execution or persistence activities on the host machine.


**Possible investigation steps**

- Investigate the process execution chain (parent process tree) for unknown processes. Examine their executable files for prevalence, whether they are located in expected locations, and if they are signed with valid digital signatures.
- If the parent process is a legitimate system utility or service, this could be related to software updates or system management. If the parent process is something user-facing like an Office application, this process could be more suspicious.
- Investigate the process metadata — such as the digital signature, directory, etc. — to obtain more context that can indicate whether the executable is associated with an expected software vendor or package.
- Investigate other alerts associated with the user/host during the past 48 hours.

**Response and Remediation**

- Initiate the incident response process based on the outcome of the triage.
- Isolate the involved hosts to prevent further post-compromise behavior.
- If the triage identified malware, search the environment for additional compromised hosts.
- Implement temporary network rules, procedures, and segmentation to contain the malware.